Add docs for the distributed namespace (#1184)
ml-explore/mlx: docs/src/usage/distributed.rst

.. _usage_distributed:

Distributed Communication
=========================

.. currentmodule:: mlx.core.distributed

MLX utilizes `MPI <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Message_Passing_Interface>`_ to
provide distributed communication operations that allow the computational cost
of training or inference to be shared across many physical machines. You can
see a list of the supported operations in the :ref:`API docs<distributed>`.

.. note::
   A lot of operations may not be supported or not as fast as they should be.
   We are adding more and tuning the ones we have as we are figuring out the
   best way to do distributed computing on Macs using MLX.

Getting Started
---------------

MLX already comes with the ability to "talk" to MPI if it is installed on the
machine. The minimal distributed program in MLX is as simple as:

.. code:: python

   import mlx.core as mx

   x = mx.distributed.all_reduce_sum(mx.ones(10))

>    print(x)

Reviewer: What do you think about adding the rank in the print? That will make it more clear what's going on in the output and add a nice feature to the minimal example

> The program above computes sums the array ``mx.ones(10)`` across all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The program above sums the array ``mx.ones(10)`` across all
```

> distributed processes. If simply launched with ``python``, however, only one
> process is launched and no distributed communication takes place.

Reviewer: Nit the double launched sounded a bit odd:

```suggestion
distributed processes. If simply run with ``python``, however, only one
process is launched and no distributed communication takes place.
```

To launch the program in distributed mode we need to use ``mpirun`` or
``mpiexec`` depending on the MPI installation. The simplest possible way is the
following:

.. code:: shell

    $ mpirun -np 2 python test.py
    array([2, 2, 2, ..., 2, 2, 2], dtype=float32)
    array([2, 2, 2, ..., 2, 2, 2], dtype=float32)

The above launches two processes on the same (local) machine and we can see
both standard output streams. The processes send the array of 1s to each other
and compute the sum which is printed. Launching with ``mpirun -np 4 ...`` would
print 4 etc.

Installing MPI
---------------

> MPI can be installed with homebrew, using the anaconda package manager or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MPI can be installed with Homebrew, using the Anaconda package manager or
```

compiled from source. Most of our testing is done using ``openmpi`` installed

> with the anaconda package manager as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with the Anaconda package manager as follows:
```

.. code:: shell

    $ conda install openmpi

> Installing with homebrew may require specifying the location of ``libmpi.dyld``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Installing with Homebrew may require specifying the location of ``libmpi.dyld``
```

so that MLX can find it and load it at runtime. This can simply be achieved by
passing the ``DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH`` environment variable to ``mpirun``.

.. code:: shell

    $ mpirun -np 2 -x DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH=/opt/homebrew/lib/ python test.py

Setting up Remote Hosts
-----------------------

MPI can automatically connect to remote hosts and set up the communication over
the network if the remote hosts can be accessed via ssh. A good checklist to
debug connectivity issues is the following:

* ``ssh hostname`` works from all machines to all machines without asking for
  password or host confirmation
* ``mpirun`` is accessible on all machines. You can call ``mpirun`` using its

>   full path to force a specific prefix on all machines.

Reviewer: >  force a specific prefix on all machines.

I think what that means is to use a mpi at a certain location e.g. `/my/installed/mpirun`?

Author: Yeah exactly. I changed it to "You can call ``mpirun`` using its full path to force all machines to use that path."

* Ensure that the ``hostname`` used by MPI is the one that you have configured
  in the ``.ssh/config`` files on all machines. MPI could be using ``foo`` from
  a ``hostname`` defined as ``foo.bar.com`` if the ``hostname`` of the current
  machine is ``baz.bar.com``.

An easy way to pass the host names to MPI is using a host file. A host file
looks like the following:

.. code::

    host1 slots=1

>     host2 slots=1

Reviewer: I'm slightly confused by the setup description here. Is `host1` supposed to be e.g. `foo` and `host2` supposed to be `baz` in this example? 

Maybe that third bullet could be simpler or switched to be an example of how to specify the host file and use it with MPI?

Author: That particular peculiarity cost me at least a day in debugging.

The host name in the host file can be whatever, ideally its FQDN. However, when the hosts share a part of the domain then MPI is not using the FQDN but just the distinct subset.

To make it concrete, if we have the following 2 hosts `foo.bar.com` and `baz.bar.com`, MPI will (may) not try to ssh to `foo.bar.com` but instead simply to `foo`. The problem that arises is that we may not have configured ssh to `foo` but only to `foo.bar.com`.

I removed it from the bullet and made it a note and added a few more clarifications on the hostfile example.

When using MLX, it is very likely that you want to use 1 slot per host, ie one

> process per host.  Moreover, the hostfile needs to also contain the current
> host if you wlso ant to run on the local host. Passing the host file to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
process per host.  The hostfile also needs to contain the current
host if you want to run on the local host. Passing the host file to
```

have to :func:`mlx.utils.tree_map` the gradients with following function.

.. code:: python

    def all_reduce_avg(x):
        return mx.distributed.all_reduce_sum(x) / mx.distributed.init().size()

Putting everything together our training loop step looks as follows with
everything else remaining the same.

.. code:: python

    from mlx.utils import tree_map

    def all_reduce_grads(grads):
        N = mx.distributed.init()
        if N == 1:
            return grads
        return tree_map(
                lambda x: mx.distributed.all_reduce_sum(x) / N,
                grads)

    def step(model, x, y):
        loss, grads = loss_grad_fn(model, x, y)
        grads = all_reduce_grads(grads)  # <--- This line was added
        optimizer.update(model, grads)
        return loss

Tuning All Reduce
-----------------

We are working on improving the performance of all reduce on MLX but for now
the two main things one can do to extract the most out of distributed training with MLX are:

1. Perform a few large reductions instead of many small ones to improve
   bandwidth and latency
2. Pass ``--mca btl_tcp_links 4`` to ``mpirun`` to configure it to use 4 tcp

>    connections between each host to improve bandwidth

Reviewer: This requires 4 physical connections right?

Author: This opens four sockets between each host pair. The reason is that the driver doesn't manage to saturate the bandwidth with a single socket so it is better to have many. 2 gets 90% of the way and above 4 didn't improve further in my testing.

compiled from source. Most of our testing is done using ``openmpi`` installed
with the Anaconda package manager as follows:

.. code:: shell

    $ conda install openmpi

Installing with Homebrew may require specifying the location of ``libmpi.dyld``
so that MLX can find it and load it at runtime. This can simply be achieved by
passing the ``DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH`` environment variable to ``mpirun``.

.. code:: shell

    $ mpirun -np 2 -x DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH=/opt/homebrew/lib/ python test.py

Setting up Remote Hosts
-----------------------

MPI can automatically connect to remote hosts and set up the communication over
the network if the remote hosts can be accessed via ssh. A good checklist to
debug connectivity issues is the following:

* ``ssh hostname`` works from all machines to all machines without asking for
  password or host confirmation
* ``mpirun`` is accessible on all machines. You can call ``mpirun`` using its
  full path to force all machines to use a specific path.
* Ensure that the ``hostname`` used by MPI is the one that you have configured
  in the ``.ssh/config`` files on all machines.

.. note::

>   For an example hostname ``foo.bar.com`` MPI could be using only ``foo`` as
>   the hostname passed to ssh, especially if the current host's name is also
>   ``*.bar.com``.

Reviewer: Sorry this is a nit: the word "especially" makes it sound like there are other cases. But presumably it only works if the current hostname has the same domain suffix?

Maybe rephrase like:
```suggestion
  For an example hostname ``foo.bar.com`` MPI can use only ``foo`` as
  the hostname passed to ssh if the current hostname matches ``*.bar.com``.
```

Author: It isn't really a nit, you are correct. I put it to mean that there may be other cases. I couldn't find this anywhere in some docs or specs I just inferred it. Basically MPI was using just ``foo`` and couldn't connect to the remote hosts.

I think just using "can use only" or "may use only" is cleaner and conveys the same meaning so I 'll use it verbatim :-)

process per host.  The hostfile also needs to contain the current
host if you want to run on the local host. Passing the host file to
``mpirun`` is simply done using the ``--hostfile`` command line argument.

Training Example
----------------

In this section we will adapt an MLX training loop to support data parallel
distributed training. Namely, we will average the gradients across a set of
hosts before applying them to the model.

Our training loop looks like the following code snippet if we omit the model,
dataset and optimizer initialization.

.. code:: python

    model = ...
    optimizer = ...
    dataset = ...

    def step(model, x, y):
        loss, grads = loss_grad_fn(model, x, y)
        optimizer.update(model, grads)
        return loss

    for x, y in dataset:
        loss = step(model, x, y)
        mx.eval(loss, model.parameters())

All we have to do to average the gradients across machines is perform an
:func:`all_reduce_sum` and divide by the size of the :class:`Group`. Namely we
have to :func:`mlx.utils.tree_map` the gradients with following function.

.. code:: python

    def all_reduce_avg(x):

>         return mx.distributed.all_reduce_sum(x) / mx.distributed.init().size()

Reviewer: Should that be the same function as `all_reduce_grads` below?
